Before Andy Warhol was the Pop Art icon that
he is know as today, he was a commercial illustrator.
And, Quite a successful one too, known for
his blotted-ink drawings of shoes for advertisements,
and designs of album covers.
For years, he worked with pop motifs, and
admired the works of Robert Rauschenberg and
Jasper Johns, but always as an outsider. At
this time, he didn’t have his own subject
or style as a fine artist.
Following the work of European Pop artists
Eduardo Paolozzi and Richard Hamilton, Warhol
made an artwork featuring a Coca Cola bottle.
But instead of collage or using the brand
as a component in the work as they had, the
bottle was the sole motif.
Warhol simplified the bottle to a graphic
image, placed beside it’s recognizable logo.
It was too subjective. Warhol couldn’t resist
the painterly brushstrokes that one would
associate with abstract expressionism. They
undermined the otherwise detached, coolness of the image.
Warhol would continue to experiment with style
and subjects in his paintings: black and white
paintings of photos from a newspaper, allowing
drips of paint to fall from the text.
He often asked for suggestions of what to
paint, and when one person suggested the most
pervasive piece of pop culture - like a dollar
bill or a stick of chewing gum - Warhol would
begin to take images that were already really
popular, and filled with mass appeal. He would
begin to make images as bold and brash as
the advertisements themselves.
Warhol believed that there were were two ways
to interpret the icons and artifacts of the
consumer boom:
1. The idealized perfect people and objects
as cliches or classicism; or
2. seen as crass or exploitative.
This “low” motif’s psychological tension
was full of possibilities.
For twenty years, Warhol had the same exact
lunch every single day: A slice of bread and
a can of Campbell’s soup. And he decided
to paint the can of very variety of Campbell’s soup.
While he couldn’t find a gallery that would
show his work in New York, he did find one
in Los Angeles. In July of 1962, at Irving
Blum’s Ferus Gallery, 32 paintings of Andy
Warhol’s Campbell's Soup Cans were exhibited.
They hung in a single horizontal line, supported
by a very shallow, white shelf. Not unlike
the shelf of a grocery store.
For Warhol, these were the most literal depiction
of mass consumption.
These paintings were silkscreened, which is
a printmaking method originally used for advertising.
It’s a semi-mechanized process, in which
he can paint the base image of the can over
and over on different canvases. And then he
would go in and hand-paint or stencil the
individual names of the soup varieties.
Gone were the individual’s stokes from the
artist’s hands, it’s absence replaced
with a cold detachedness.
The repetitive nature parodies the methods
of modern advertising, the bombardment of
the same image over and over in order to infiltrate
the consumer’s consciousness.
This uniformity also went against the traditional
art market - art was supposed to unique, and
rare and precious. Not mass produced.
These soup cans would not only become the
defining work of Andy Warhol’s fine art
career, but Pop Art itself - it’s obsession
with mass production and consumer culture.
I hope you guys enjoyed this video. If you
want to keep learning more about Andy Warhol,
head over to my blog at littlearttalks.com
I’ll have a blog post linked below more
about Andy Warhol’s later works.
If you enjoyed this video, please give it
a thumbs up and check out some of my other
art history videos. I also have a bunch on
the way, so please subscribe for future ones.
Thanks so much for watching and I’ll see
you guys next time.
Warhol often asked for suggestions of what
to paint, and when one person suggested the
most pervasive piece of pop culture